add page on sensitive data handling (#6850)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/security/handling-sensitive-data.md

---

> title: Handling Sensitive Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Handling sensitive data
```

description:
  Best practices and guidance for handling sensitive data in OpenTelemetry
weight: 100
cSpell:ignore: anonymization
---

When implementing OpenTelemetry, it's crucial to be mindful of sensitive data
handling. The collection of telemetry data always carries the risk of
inadvertently capturing sensitive or personal information that may be subject to
various privacy regulations and compliance requirements.

> ## Your Responsibility

Reviewer: Best to use title casing in docs' headings.

What data is sensitive varies from situation to situation. Be particularly
careful with:

- Personal Identifiable Information (PII)
- Authentication credentials
- Session tokens
- Financial information
- Health-related data
- User behavior data

## Data Minimization

When collecting telemetry potentially sensitive data, follow the principle of
[data minimization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_minimization). This
means:

- Only collect data that serves an observability purpose.
- Avoid collecting personal information unless absolutely necessary.
- Consider whether aggregated or anonymized data could serve the same purpose.
- Regularly review collected attributes to ensure they remain necessary.

## Protecting Sensitive Data

As outlined above, the best thing you can do is not collecting data, that is
sensitive or potentially sensitive. However you mean want to collect this data
under certain circumstances, or you have no full control over the data being
collected, and need ways to scrape the data in post processing. The following
suggestions can help you with that.

The [OpenTelemetry Collector](/docs/collector) provides several processors that
can help manage sensitive data:

> - [`attribute` processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/attributesprocessor):
>   Remove or modify specific attributes
> - [`filter` processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/filterprocessor):
>   Filter out entire spans or metrics containing sensitive data
> - [`redaction` processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/redactionprocessor):
>   Deletes span, log, and metric datapoint attributes that don’t match a list of
>   allowed attributes.
> - [`transform` processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/transformprocessor):
>   Transform data using regular expressions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`attribute` processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/attributesprocessor):
  Remove or modify specific attributes.
- [`filter` processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/filterprocessor):
  Filter out entire spans or metrics containing sensitive data.
- [`redaction` processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/redactionprocessor):
  Deletes span, log, and metric datapoint attributes that don’t match a list of
  allowed attributes.
- [`transform` processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/transformprocessor):
  Transform data using regular expressions.
```

> For example the following configuration for the `attribute` processor is
> deleting and redacting sensitive
> [`user`](/docs/specs/semconv/attributes-registry/user/#user-hash) information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example the following configuration for the `attribute` processor
deletes and redacts sensitive
[`user`](/docs/specs/semconv/attributes-registry/user/#user-hash) information:
```

Reviewer: Perhaps you can expand on this by saying what pieces it redacts or deletes in particular.

```yaml
processors:
  attributes/example:
    actions:
      - key: user.email
        action: hash
      - key: user.full_name
        action: delete
```

> Similarly, the following configuration for the `transform` processor can be used
> remove the `user.id` and replace it with a `user.hash`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, you can use the following configuration for the `transform` processor
to remove the `user.id` and replace it with a `user.hash`:
```

```yaml
transform:
  trace_statements:
    - context: span
      statements:
        - set(attributes["user.hash"], SHA256(attributes["user.id"]))
        - delete_key(attributes, "user.id")
```

{{% alert title="Risk and Limitations of hashing for anonymization" color="warning" %}}

Hashing the ID or name of a user may not provide the level of anonymization you
need, since hashes are reversible in practice if the input space is small and
predictable (e.g. numeric user IDs).

{{% /alert %}}

As an alternative to hashing you can truncate data, or group it by a common
prefix or suffix. This for example applies to dates (keep only the year, or the
year + month), email addresses (keep domain, drop local-part) or IP addresses
(drop the last octet of IPv4). For example, the following configuration for the

> `transform` processor drops the last octet of a `client.address` attribute:

Reviewer: Could you turn the list of examples in a list?

```yaml
transform:
  trace_statements:
    - context: span
      statements:
        - replace_pattern(attributes["my.span.attr"], "\\.\\d+$", ".0")
```

> Finally, an example for the `redaction` processor to delete certain attributes,
> can be found in the section
> ["Scrub sensitive data"](/docs/security/config-best-practices/#scrub-sensitive-data)
> in the collector configuration page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find an example for the `redaction` processor to delete certain attributes,
in the section
["Scrub sensitive data"](/docs/security/config-best-practices/#scrub-sensitive-data)
of the Collector configuration page.
```

  Remove or modify specific attributes.
- [`filter` processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/filterprocessor):
  Filter out entire spans or metrics containing sensitive data.
- [`redaction` processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/redactionprocessor):
  Delete span, log, and metric datapoint attributes that don’t match a list of
  allowed attributes.
- [`transform` processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/transformprocessor):
  Transform data using regular expressions.

### Deleting and hashing user information

The following configuration for the `attribute` processor is hashing the
`user.email` and deleting `user.full_name` from sensitive
[`user`](/docs/specs/semconv/attributes-registry/user/#user-hash) information:

```yaml
processors:
  attributes/example:
    actions:
      - key: user.email
        action: hash
      - key: user.full_name
        action: delete
```

### Replacing `user.id` with `user.hash`

> The following configuration for the `transform` processor can be used remove the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following configuration for the `transform` processor can be used to remove the
```

  trace_statements:
    - context: span
      statements:
        - set(attributes["user.hash"], SHA256(attributes["user.id"]))
        - delete_key(attributes, "user.id")
```

{{% alert title="Risk and limitations of hashing for anonymization" color="warning" %}}

Hashing the ID or name of a user may not provide the level of anonymization you
need, since hashes are reversible in practice if the input space is small and
predictable (e.g. numeric user IDs).

{{% /alert %}}

### Truncating IP addresses

As an alternative to hashing you can truncate data, or group it by a common
prefix or suffix. This for example applies to

- dates, where you keep only the year or the year and the month, but drop the
  day.
- email addresses, where you drop the local part and only keep the domain.
- IP addresses, where you drop drop the last octet of IPv4 or the last 80 bits
  of IPv6.

The following configuration for the `transform` processor drops the last octet
of a `client.address` attribute:

```yaml
transform:
  trace_statements:
    - context: span
      statements:
        - replace_pattern(attributes["client.address"], "\\.\\d+$", ".0")
```

### Delete attributes with redaction processor

> Finally, an example for the `redaction` processor to delete certain attributes,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, an example for the `redaction` processor to delete certain attributes
```
